.TH WIN31X 1 "July 18, 2026" "win31x 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
win31x \- a minimal Windows 3.1-inspired window manager for X11
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B win31x
.RI [ --display " display" ]
.RI [ --help ]
.RI [ --version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Win31 X
is a small reparenting window manager intended to run as the only window
manager in an Xorg session.  It draws classic beveled frames, places minimized
applications on the desktop as clickable icons, and provides an Applications
desktop icon backed by installed freedesktop desktop entries.  A Control Panel
desktop icon provides Wi-Fi, color-scheme, and automatic screen-lock settings.
Managed applications have maximize/restore controls and can be snapped to the
left or right half of a monitor by dragging their title bar to that edge.
Title-bar moves show a classic rubber-band outline and move the real window
only when the pointer button is released, reducing repaint tearing under Xorg
and QEMU.
Application entries and minimized clients use their real program icons when a
usable desktop-entry Icon or _NET_WM_ICON value is available.
Applications and Control Panel icon positions, Applications, Control Panel,
and Run geometry,
managed application geometry, colors, and the selected Control Panel section
are restored between logins.
Right-clicking unused desktop space opens a session menu for locking, logging
out, restarting, or shutting down.  Lock starts immediately; the other three
actions require confirmation in a classic dialog.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR --display " " DISPLAY
Connect to DISPLAY instead of the value in the
.B DISPLAY
environment variable.
.TP
.BR -h , " --help"
Show command-line help.
.TP
.BR -v , " --version"
Show the program version.
.SH DESKTOP CONTROLS
Click the Applications icon once to open the launcher.  Select an application
with the pointer or arrow keys and double-click it, or press Enter, to start it.
The mouse wheel and Page Up/Page Down scroll it.  Starting an application does
not close the launcher.
.PP
Click the Control Panel icon once to open it.  Wi-Fi can refresh the visible
NetworkManager networks, connect to a selected open or personal WPA/SAE
network, and disconnect the active network.  Colors applies one of five desktop
and active-title schemes immediately.  Auto Lock can enable or disable idle
locking, select a 1, 5, 10, 15, 30, 60, or 120 minute preset, or lock
immediately.  Color, auto-lock, and the selected Control Panel section are
saved automatically.
.PP
Drag the Applications or Control Panel desktop icon to reposition it on any
monitor.  A press and release without dragging still opens it.  The icon's
monitor-relative position is saved automatically.
.PP
Applications and Control Panel can remain open at the same time.  They stay
mapped when another window takes focus or a new application starts; Escape does
not close them.  Use the window's X button, or the standard Alt+F4 binding, to
close the active one explicitly.  Their maximize/restore buttons and title-bar
edge snapping work like those on managed applications and remain within the
selected monitor.
.PP
Right-click unused desktop space to open the session menu, then click Lock,
Log Out, Restart, or Shut Down.  The menu does not open over an application or
desktop icon and does not change the active application.  Clicking elsewhere
dismisses it.  Lock starts the configured screen locker immediately.  Log Out
opens a classic confirmation dialog before ending Win31 X and therefore ending
a normal display-manager session.  Restart and Shut Down likewise require
confirmation before requesting the corresponding action from systemd.  No,
the confirmation dialog's X button, Escape, or Alt+F4 returns to the desktop
without acting.  No is selected by default; click Yes or press Y to confirm,
or move between Yes and No with Left, Right, or Tab and press Enter.  An
automatic full-screen locker cancels and replaces an open confirmation so the
lock screen always takes priority.  Local login policy determines whether a
confirmed power request is authorized.
.PP
Press Windows+R (Super+R) to open Run.  Enter an executable name or path and
optional arguments, then press Enter or click Run.  Run executes that argument
vector directly; shell operators, redirection, pipelines, and substitutions
are treated as literal text rather than evaluated.  Escape, Cancel, the X
button, or Alt+F4 closes Run without affecting Applications or Control Panel.
.PP
Use the underscore button in a title bar to minimize a window.  Its desktop
icon appears on that window's monitor and restores it with one click.  Use the
maximize/restore title-bar button to fill the window's current monitor and
return to the window's previous geometry.  Drag a title bar to move a window:
while the pointer button is held, the actual window remains stationary and a
thin rubber-band outline follows the pointer.  Releasing the button commits the
move, or snaps the window to the left or right half of the monitor at that
edge.  Drag an outer border to resize it, and use the X button to request that
it close.
Clicking any inactive application focuses and raises it; transient dialogs
remain above their owning application.  The activating pointer press is also
delivered to the application.
.SH KEY BINDINGS
.TP
.B Alt+Tab
Focus and raise the next visible application.
.TP
.B Alt+F2
Open the Applications window.
.TP
.B Alt+F4
Close the active application, Applications window, Control Panel, or Run.
.TP
.B Windows+R, Super+R
Open and focus the Run dialog.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DISPLAY
X server to use.
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME, XDG_DATA_DIRS
Locations searched for application desktop entries and their hicolor or
pixmaps PNG/XPM icons.
.TP
.B WIN31X_TERMINAL
Executable used to launch desktop entries marked Terminal=true.  It must
accept the conventional \-e option.  If unset, Win31 X searches for
x-terminal-emulator, xterm, uxterm, foot, or kitty.
.TP
.B WIN31X_ICON_DIR
Directory containing the required supplied PNG icon set.  This is primarily
useful for development and tests; installed sessions use the packaged icon
directory.
.TP
.B WIN31X_NMCLI
Absolute path to the nmcli executable.  The installed default is
.IR /usr/bin/nmcli .
This override is primarily useful for tests or nonstandard local installations.
.TP
.B WIN31X_XSS_LOCK
Absolute path to the xss-lock executable.  The installed default is
.IR /usr/bin/xss-lock .
.TP
.B WIN31X_LOCKER
Absolute path to the screen-locker executable.  The installed default is
.IR /usr/bin/xsecurelock .
.TP
.B WIN31X_SYSTEMCTL
Absolute path to the systemctl executable used by the Restart and Shut Down
desktop-menu actions.  If unset, Win31 X searches
.IR /usr/bin/systemctl
and
.IR /bin/systemctl .
The override is primarily useful for tests or nonstandard local installations;
an invalid override disables both actions.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME, HOME
Determine the location of the per-user Win31 X settings and layout files.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/applications/*.desktop
System application entries.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/applications/*.desktop
Per-user application entries.
.TP
.I /usr/share/icons/hicolor/*/apps/*, /usr/share/pixmaps/*
Usual locations for application-provided launcher icons.
.TP
.I /usr/share/win31x/icons/*.png
User-supplied application icon assets installed with Win31 X.
.TP
.I /usr/share/icons/hicolor/*/apps/win31x.png
Supplied Applications artwork used by display managers for the Win31 X session.
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/win31x/settings.conf
Private per-user color, auto-lock, and Control Panel section settings.  When
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset, the path is
.IR ~/.config/win31x/settings.conf .
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/win31x/layout.conf
Private, versioned desktop-icon, internal-window, and managed-application
geometry.  When
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset, the path is
.IR ~/.config/win31x/layout.conf .
Managed windows are identified by application ID, desktop-file ID, or
WM_CLASS, with WM_WINDOW_ROLE used when available.  Otherwise-identical
concurrent windows use best-effort ordinal slots.
.SH CONTROL PANEL SERVICES
Wi-Fi requires NetworkManager and
.BR nmcli (1).
Supported connection types are open, OWE, WPA-PSK, and SAE personal networks;
enterprise and legacy WEP setup is left to NetworkManager's other front ends.
Wi-Fi passwords are masked on screen, are not included in process arguments or
log messages, and are supplied to nmcli through a private file descriptor.
.PP
Automatic locking requires
.BR xss-lock (1)
and a locker; Debian installations use
.BR xsecurelock (1).
Win31 X owns the X server idle timeout while running and restores the previous
X saver policy when it exits.  xss-lock also integrates locking with the login
session and system suspend path.
.PP
When the configured locker is xsecurelock, its password prompt displays one
asterisk for each entered character on both idle and immediate locks.  This
confirms keyboard input but intentionally reveals password length.
Authentication remains entirely within xsecurelock and PAM; Win31 X does not
handle the lock-screen password.
.SH SESSION ACTIONS
Lock is immediate.  Log Out, Restart, and Shut Down display a classic
confirmation dialog and do nothing until explicitly confirmed.  No, the X
button, Escape, and Alt+F4 dismiss the dialog without changing the session.
No is selected by default.  The confirmation uses a modal input shield without
holding active X keyboard or pointer grabs, allowing the screen locker to take
priority at an idle timeout.  Once
confirmed, Restart and Shut Down execute the validated systemctl path directly
with the single fixed argument
.B reboot
or
.BR poweroff .
No shell or sudo command is involved.  Confirmed Log Out exits the window
manager cleanly.  The display manager and systemd/logind retain responsibility
for session teardown and authorization of power operations.
.SH MULTI-MONITOR BEHAVIOR
Win31 X prefers RandR 1.5 logical-monitor information, falls back to Xinerama
heads when RandR does not report a usable multi-monitor layout, and otherwise
treats the root window as one monitor.
.PP
An action started with the pointer uses the monitor under its click or release.
A keyboard action uses the monitor containing the focused Applications,
Control Panel, Run, or managed-client window.  If none supplies that context,
the last active monitor is retained, followed by pointer and primary-monitor
fallbacks.  The permanent Applications and Control Panel desktop icons begin
on the primary monitor, but can be dragged to another monitor and retain that
monitor-relative position.  A minimized application's icon appears on the
monitor where that client was minimized.
.PP
Maximize fills only the monitor containing the window.  Releasing a title bar
at a monitor's left or right edge snaps the window to that monitor's
corresponding half; restore returns its exact previous geometry.  Applications,
Control Panel, and Run initially open centered on the active monitor; their
saved geometry takes precedence on later logins.  The desktop menu
is constrained to the monitor where it was opened, and its Log Out, Restart,
or Shut Down confirmation is centered on that monitor.
.PP
RandR hotplug and screen-layout notifications refresh the monitor list.
Maximized and snapped windows are reapplied, ordinary windows are kept
reachable, and desktop icons, internal windows, Run, and an open confirmation
are reflowed.  An item anchored to a disconnected monitor moves to the nearest
surviving monitor, with the primary monitor as the final fallback.
This automatic rescue does not overwrite the saved preferred monitor.
.SH DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS
Multi-monitor discovery uses the XRandR and Xinerama extensions as described
above.  The supplied-color icon renderer requires a TrueColor X visual.
Standard modern Xorg configurations provide one.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR Xorg (1),
.BR xrandr (1),
.BR nmcli (1),
.BR xss-lock (1),
.BR xsecurelock (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR startx (1),
.BR xterm (1)
